# Open-Source Readiness

Open source is a powerful tool that offers great benefits to agencies
that make, maintain, or deploy software.  Agencies are increasingly
aware that they need open-source capabilities.  The hard part is
knowing where to start in adding skills.  In most cases, the most
important consideration is building capability to know how and when to
use FOSS strategies.

Open source is all about execution.  Reaping the benefits of open-source
investment requires completing a series of difficult steps
ranging from designing an initial strategy to building an appropriate
community to leveraging the resulting dynamics for strategic
advantage.  Most government procurement teams are not yet prepared to
travel that path and reap those rewards at scale.  They are still
growing in their ability to execute.  As an agency starts to climb the
learning curve, it can be helpful to assess current abilities as a
form of organizational readiness, and to describe the journey to
mastery as one of gaining capability.

To do that, we might locate current capabilities in a readiness model.
This clarifies where an agency is in its journey to mastery and also
suggests next steps and likely results.  Often, teams use these models
to identify areas for potential growth.  They are most useful for
those early in their open-source progress, and this module focuses on
those beginning stages.  It is useful for an agency to consider its
maturity on an organization wide basis, but open source is usually
executed by teams, and it is the capabilities of specific teams that
matter most.  This module considers individual teams as the target for
analysis because even agency-wide open-source skills training will
succeed or fail mostly at the level of specific teams working on
specific projects.

There are several readiness models that go by various names.
Practitioners often describe climbing the "readiness ladder."

 * [TODO Group model](https://github.com/todogroup/ospo101/blob/main/module2/README.md#climbing-the-open-source-ladder)

 * [Jeff McAffer's Engagement Model](https://mcaffer.com/2019/02/Open-source-engagement)

 * [GitHub's Maturity Model](https://github.com/github/maturity-model)

 * [Qalipso's Model](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/OpenSource_Maturity_Model)

 * [Stephen Walli's Maturation Toward Adulthood](https://opensource.com/life/15/4/what-does-an-adult-look-like-in-an-open-source-community)

 * [FinOS Open Source Ladder](https://www.finos.org/hubfs/FINOS/website/pages/community/Open%20Source%20Readiness%20Roadmap%20-%203.10.2018.png)

As you can see, there are a number of such models.  It is often worth
considering more than one when examining an organization or a
particular team.  Of the published models, we find McAffer's in
particular is useful because it includes strategic components.  It
accounts for realistic failure modes, and understands that open-source
readiness will be unevenly distributed in any agency large enough to
have multiple teams.


FURTHER READING Microsoft Senior Director Jeff McAffer (now Senior Director at GitHub) has published a
  useful readiness model at
  https://mcaffer.com/2019/02/Open-source-engagement

On many teams, initial open-source capabilities might be nascent.
Most team members have not had significant (or perhaps even any)
experience using open-source strategies to create value.  The team
works in an environment where FOSS investment is rare, and many do not
see much reason to change that.  That lack of knowledge might
translate in some quarters into hostility toward FOSS.  People will
say "It can never work here" even as open source slowly seeps into
more and more of the technology around them.

At this stage, open-source strategies will be difficult to execute.
Internal political risks might be high.  Policies needed to engage
open source productively might be missing.  Staff might not know how
to begin working with external open-source contributors.  Many people
might lack even a basic understanding of what it means to do open-source
work.  Efforts to work in an open-source mode suffer from an
increased risk of failure, and they might fail in ways that reinforce
the belief that open source is not worth further consideration.

Many factors might move a team past this early stage and on their way
toward tolerating open source, but movement usually comes from
external pressure, changing environments, and staff additions and
turnover.  As conditions around an agency begin to change, and the
costs and risks of refusing to engage start to rise, pressure to
engage open source will increase.

Those costs might include the pain of maintaining internal forks of
external open-source projects. Or more commonly, the risks of not
maintaining all those forks.  Similarly, the benefits of making minor
open-source investments start to become clear, even if only because
other teams will begin to reap those benefits and your team gains
good, internal examples to follow.

However any specific team begins to adapt, climbing the learning curve
is often an exercise in experimentation.  Most don't think of open-source
investment in those terms.  Instead, they cast initial open-source
forays as making small concessions to necessity.  Some see
these experiments as seizing unique, non-repeatable advantages.  Most
don't think of those small, initial projects as the future direction
of the team.  More teams should consider the possibility, though.
Sometimes, explicitly labeling such experiments as learning exercises
and skill-building allows a team to maximize the value of those
experimental investments.  It prioritizes reflective analysis and
learning.  It gives permission to fail.  Those can be useful to teams
seeking adaptability.  When considering McAffer's model, we might
relabel his "tolerance" phase as "experimentation".

KEY RECOMMENDATION: Look for the places where your lack of open-source
  investment are causing problems that can be addressed by
  small-scale, low-risk, experimental engagement.  Start there.

Experiments come in many forms, but the most common first experiment
is using some outside open-source code and engaging the open-source
project.  That might involve filing bug reports, offering a
contribution, or merely participating in project mailing lists and
forums.  These are all relatively low-risk, low-investment ways to
begin connecting a team to outside FOSS projects.  If your team's
future plans include larger-scale open-source engagement, building
skills through these kinds of small-scale experiments can be very
productive.

The experimentation phase is usually a skill-building and
knowledge-gaining phase because it exercises the skills that cause a
team to shift from merely tolerating open source to trying to harness
it.  Having those skills throughout a team provides the vision that
starts to shift attitudes at more than just an individual level.

The problem that arises as teams start to embrace FOSS is that they
lack the infrastructure to succeed at it across the entire
organization.  They are missing policies, auditing, skills, culture,
and experience.  This is a pivotal, risky moment.  A large number of
teams will still be in the initial phases.  Efforts to move internal
culture toward open source will be perceived by some as a pointless
shift toward the latest buzzword.  Those experimental skills will be
unevenly distributed internally.  Many new open-source projects will
fail, and this will convince some that all open source is destined to
fail.  In some agencies, some might even sabotage open-source projects
for policy or political reasons.

McAffer sees this phase as one of hype, and perhaps that's because
it's also when an agency embraces open source without quite being
ready to execute.  Agencies in this phase tend to engage FOSS in
shallow, unsophisticated ways simply because they don't yet have the
experience to make better strategic use of open-source opportunities.
The way to move past this stage is not to reduce the hype (though that
might help) but rather to increase readiness.

When an agency reaches this stage, it will have multiple teams eager
to do open source and multiple teams still wary of the change.
Managers at this stage will need guidance on using FOSS as a strategic
component and managing teams with increasingly external deliverables.
Developers will need technical infrastructure, easy-to-follow
licensing policies, and permission to engage externally.  Perhaps more
importantly, they will need to develop new habits of working in the
open and sharing even early, rough versions of their work.  Beyond
just technical teams, Human Resources will need hiring and
compensation guidance as both skills and performance evaluation
criteria shift.  Building internal systems that provide all of those
pieces is how agencies gain proficiency.  Adding skills, process, and
policy is how that happens, and it requires management approval and
resources.  Agencies that fail to provide this support from fairly
high in the organization tend to level off at this level of readiness.

Another consideration for agencies climbing the readiness ladder is
that the need for skilled open-source practitioners will almost always
exceed the supply.  The demand for open-source skills is growing so
fast, the world does not have enough experienced open-source
strategists and developers to keep up.  A number of companies and
universities have decided to address this problem by centralizing much
of their open-source expertise in an Open Source Programs Office
(OSPO).  The OSPO's job is to use that collected expertise to improve
open-source readiness and efficacy across the entire organization.  We
are not aware of any agencies that have an OSPO, but governments
should consider focusing open-source readiness efforts on one agency
or department that can then help others.  In the United States, the
federal government did this with 18F, which, after reaching relatively
high levels of open-source capability and knowledge, has developed
guidance for other agencies approaching open source. Code.gov has created a [toolkit](https://github.com/GSA/code-gov-open-source-toolkit) that goes in-depth for approaching open source.

All of the above describes a path from the very beginning toward
eventual mastery of open source.  In this section, the discussion
focuses on readiness in terms of skills and capabilities, but the
truth is that doing open source well is more of a cultural shift than
anything else. Organizations using open source fluently quickly find
that the open approach is just their default process.  That culture
shift is what lies at the top of the readiness learning curve.

KEY RECOMMENDATION: Engage the team in a frank discussion about open
  source readiness.  Locate the team and the organization on McAffer's
  engagement model.  Identify three key steps the people in that
  discussion can take to improve readiness at the team level.
